_pages/langservices.md, before:

---
permalink: /langservices/
title: "Language Services"
excerpt: "Professional language services"
author_profile: true
---

## Professional Language Services

I provide specialized language services that combine linguistic expertise with technical precision for clients working with technology, research, and cross-cultural communication.

## Service Areas

* **Translation & Localization**: Technical documentation, UI, software, and web content

* **Technical Language Consulting**: NLP data development, corpus annotation, implementation advice

* **Linguistic Quality Assurance**: Multilingual UI validation, localization accuracy, terminology consistency

* **Content Creation**: Technical writing, documentation, multilingual SEO, educational materials


## Working Languages

- **English, Cantonese, Chinese (Traditional & Simplified), Mandarin, German, French**


## Approach

My services combine linguistic expertise with technical understanding, ensuring accurate communication across languages while maintaining technical precision. I specialize in projects requiring both language skills and technical knowledge, having worked with clients across technology, healthcare, education, and public sectors. This diverse experience informs my ability to deliver language solutions tailored to specific industry requirements and quality standards.

[Contact me](/contact/) to discuss how my language services can help with your multilingual projects.

Commit message:

Enhance language services description with new projects

_pages/langservices.md, after:

---
permalink: /langservices/
title: "Language Services"
excerpt: "Professional language services"
author_profile: true
---

## Professional Language Services

I provide specialized language services that combine linguistic expertise with technical precision for clients working with technology, research, and cross-cultural communication. 

## Service Areas

* **Translation & Localization**: Technical documentation, UI, software, and web content

* **Technical Language Consulting**: NLP data development, corpus annotation, implementation advice

* **Linguistic Quality Assurance**: Multilingual UI validation, localization accuracy, terminology consistency

* **Content Creation**: Technical writing, documentation, multilingual SEO, educational materials


## Working Languages

- **English, Cantonese, Chinese (Traditional & Simplified), Mandarin, German, French**

Currently, I'm leading multilingual localization and translation across text and speech modalities for Air Canada projects, ensuring linguistic accuracy and cultural adaptation between EN-CA, FR-CA and ZH-HK. I also develop localization guidelines and quality standards for cross-modal content delivery.

## Approach

My services combine linguistic expertise with technical understanding, ensuring accurate communication across languages while maintaining technical precision. I specialize in projects requiring both language skills and technical knowledge, having worked with clients across technology, healthcare, education, and public sectors. This diverse experience informs my ability to deliver language solutions tailored to specific industry requirements and quality standards.

[Contact me](/contact/) to discuss how my language services can help with your multilingual projects.
